[Music]
the arrival of doom four years ago marks
the return of ed software to prominence
its new take on doom reinvigorated the
classic franchise with the focus on high
speed combat sprawling stage design and
old-school sensibilities but it was the
underlying technology that perhaps
surprised us the most with a focus on 60
frames per second gameplay and
cutting-edge visuals in tech six
delivers a remarkably high quality
presentation no matter where you play it
and now four years later Doom has
returned once again this is doom eternal
it's faster harder and sleeker than the
previous game and it's packed with
larger levels and more enemies around
every corner
but it's the technology behind it that
is perhaps most impressive powered by
EdTech 7 doom eternal represents the
latest and greatest from its software
and for this video we'll check out the
improvements made to the engine and
tools powering the game how has it tech
7 evolved over the years we'll also
check out the game on each console along
the way including performance metrics
and visual quality analysis plus 500
frames per second on a PC why not
so grab your trusty shotgun and let's
rip and tear and to doom eternal
[Music]
from the moment you begin do maternal
it's clear that things have changed for
the better textures are now more
detailed while the world is more tightly
packed with visual flourishes even if
you can't put your finger on it right
away there's something special about
these environments that just feels
different
which might leave some wondering how is
it that a game on the same consoles can
look and run so much better than a
previous installment well the answer
isn't so simple but the basic idea is it
comes down to key changes made to the
underlying technology and tools used to
create the game having discussed in tech
7 with lead engine programmer Billy Conn
he reiterated that the main objective
here is to deliver a combination of
visuals and framerate and equality so
high that most people will wonder how it
was even possible one of the first major
shifts is the move to Vulcan not just
for in-game rendering but for everything
including the backend tools used to
create the game Vulcan enables faster
performance with an in-studio enabling
the creators to work faster and more
efficiently assets can be created and
implemented at a much higher rate than
the previous game this boost in
developer efficiency pays dividends by
allowing a relatively small group of
people to create a ton of content in a
reasonable amount of time this is
evident in the variety on display doom
eternal takes players to many different
places this time around just as was
promised from ruined cities
two space colonies
other dimensions
and beyond the world is constantly
changing eternal features upwards of ten
times the number of unique assets when
compared to the previous game and all of
those assets appear more detailed than
ever before one piece of this increased
level of detail however stems from the
shift away from mega texture originally
created for rage mega texture was
designed to allow an increase in variety
by storing texture data in a large
texture Atlas that could be referenced
based on what was needed on-screen at
any moment you were basically using one
giant texture for the entire world the
process for fetching required texture
data makes a lot of sense on a platform
like PlayStation 3 with limited memory
but it doesn't really scale well and has
a lot of limitations disk space
requirements were huge iterating on
textures required a lot of extra time on
the development side and quality was
compromised by multiple steps of
compression this means that even in doom
2016 where mega texture was updated to
support additional layers such as
normals it required a lot of space was
difficult to work with and still exhibit
plenty of pappan check out the textures
here in doom 2016 notice how they fade
in as you draw closer even when swapping
weapons you'll notice texture detail
sort of appear seconds after the weapon
is already on screen
the textures themselves were also
limited in fidelity at close proximity
and exhibit visible compression
artifacts now for EdTech 7 the team has
instead crafted a high-performance image
streaming solution completely
eliminating mega texture along the way
this means that Doom eternal can utilize
much higher resolution textures with a
huge amount of detail packed into every
surface it's evident everywhere from the
environments
two characters and weapon models just
look at the amount of detail packed into
the doom Slayer here it looks great this
is one of the most significant
improvements over the previous game I
think this new approach also means that
artists can more quickly make changes
combine layers and generally build more
interesting assets without the same
drawbacks as in tech 6 this is one of
the most powerful editions and thanks to
the team at eed we have capture of the
tools in action to demonstrate how it
works basically within Tec seven artists
have much more control of asset
materials so firstly there's the
geometry decal system which has been
expanded to allow artists to directly
place decals on models during asset
creations these decals can be moved
around wherever you want allowing for
increased experimentation and efficiency
you don't need to rebuild everything
when you want to make a change it all
just happens real time right here in
this example the artist is adding
detailed to this crate here to give the
object surface an increased perception
of depth this crate can be directly
imported into its studio then and if you
look closely the results are immediately
evident the box is more detailed but it
becomes more obvious if we disable the
rest of the rendering and only show geo
decals it demonstrates just how
frequently they're used check out all
the extra detail that's been added to
this helicopter model it looks great
[Music]
jumping into a game map then look
closely at the various details as we
toggle between them all those tiny
flourishes are thanks to the Geo decal
system well it may not seem like a big
deal for the end-user this greatly
improves the speed and efficiency of
asset creation which means doom eternal
can feature many more unique objects
compared to the previous game in
addition more traditional stamped decals
can also be manipulated in real time
allowing the artists to directly apply
the desired artwork to models within the
editing environment it's just another
tool in the toolbox designed to allow
flexible asset creation lastly there's
the painting system which also allows
you to directly change vertex colors and
material blending properties in real
time it takes seven supports eight
material layers at once with per pixel
blending between any two of them at a
time and here's an example with the
material blending disabled this wall
appears rather simplistic with a single
repeating pattern across its surface but
if we enable material blending suddenly
it all makes sense that repeating
material is visible beneath the cracked
stonework on top of it the key here is
that artists can create all these
different materials then simply paint
over the surfaces to create their
desired look the result is this
in this view geo decal stamps and
material blending can be enabled or
disabled in real time without these
features objects and surfaces appear
rather simplistic lacking the fine
detail work that you see when utilizing
them it really has a significant impact
on the presentation and hopefully you
have a better idea of how these features
work together to help the art team build
more convincing worlds for the players
to explore so to reiterate these
features are important because it allows
the artist to create assets faster than
ever before which means more variety in
the game and improved visuals another
element in pushing world detailed
forward lies in geometry Doom eternal
features dramatically more complex
scenes to explore with an average of 8
to 10 times more triangles per scene
laid out raw you might have as many as
80 to 90 milli
triangles in view that's a lot and this
wireframe view should give you a better
idea of just how complex each scene
truly is there's so much geometric
detail packed into every single map of
course machines would buckle under this
load which is where the new GPU triangle
and occlusion culling system come into
play from what I understand using the
CPU the game determines surfaces that
are not needed during rendering and it
rejects them a small software buffer
which is basically a small texture
created each frame then tells the game
which surfaces are occluded from view
and then this info is sent to the GPU
this helps the game draw only the
visible triangles each frame and its
efficiency allows the team to utilize
higher density meshes to build the world
now there's nothing new about this
concept of course but the efficiency in
which it is implemented here is what
allows them to push geometry so high
while still targeting 60 frames per
second now this is coupled with a new
LOD system that is designed to very
efficiently switch between different
detail levels on models without
interrupting the presentation with
visible popin and this works basically
by determining how much of the screen
space an object takes up on screen at a
per pixel level then using the factor
generated by this process to decide
uniformly when to switch Elodie's after
all if you're running at a lower
resolution you don't need to waste
resources on the higher quality objects
at a great distance when we get to
console differences you'll see more of
this effect in action there's also a new
light calling system which allows for
per pixel depth information to be read
on each light by rejecting unnecessary
pixels per light than designers have
more flexibility in terms of how many
lights per scene can be utilized that
means there's more dynamic and point
lights in every stage there's a lot of
flexibility with how lights are placed
in the editor and those lights can have
different properties such as the option
to cast shadows with so many dynamic
lights in a scene you might even think
that this is a deferred render but that
is not the case do eternal is forward
rendered so thus far you should have a
idea of the type of work that has been
done to increase performance it's about
aggressively managing what does and does
not appear on the screen these
techniques are a key part of the
optimization process and a big part of
why do maternal can throw around so much
more detail per scene I mean just look
at this ruined city area there's so much
geometric detail on screen and so many
different lights and enemies and moving
objects and animations the sheer density
of it all is just remarkable for a 60
frames-per-second game like this but
there are more features to discuss even
firstly the gore system each model is
composed of multiple geometric layers
sort of smashed together the idea is
that you can dynamically clip through
chunks of the model revealing layers
beneath the surface
perfect for chainsawing enemies to
pieces everything is built around these
unified rigs that are designed to be
easy to edit enabling faster content
creation and more creative dismemberment
there's also an improved blood splatter
system that is combined with the
destructible demon system to great
effect it all works in tandem to create
enemies that feel more like fleshy beans
as opposed to static models your weapon
has a genuine impact on enemies as you
engage in combat making it feel as if
you're doing real damage basic animation
is also refined over the previous game
with enemies moving effortlessly through
the scene chasing the doom Slayer at
every turn but there's another big
animation feature in this it tech 7
supports Alembic animation caching a
technique pioneered by Industrial Light
and Magic for the film industry almost
10 years ago this enables complex
reusable animations to playback
effortlessly
within the real time game allowing for
more nuanced animations and events we've
seen this kind of stuff before in games
like Gears 5 but doom eternal utilizes
it everywhere yes there are event
sequences such as this explosion here
that use Olympic cached animation to
create the effect of pieces sort of
blowing apart around the scene
here's a better look at that same
sequence as it appears in the editor
but what's interesting is that Alembic
animation is used all over the game
world rather than just for specific
scenes writhing tentacles and demonic
bits pulsate realistically for instance
and this is done using Alembic all of
this data is streamed as necessary but
it's relatively light on resources I'm
told this helps the world around you
feel more alive than the previous game
as this just this constant sense of
animation in play as you explore so that
should give you an idea of some of the
features added to the engine but really
the proof is in the pudding we've seen a
lot of shots already but I can't stress
enough just how impressive doom eternal
is to behold just consider this every
stage is larger than anything in doom
2016 while offering more geometry higher
resolution materials additional
animation and tons of dynamic lights
it's also packed with more variety on
top of that it's one of the best looking
games ever made if you ask me and that's
not even touching on the HDR support
which is new for EdTech the HDR
implementation and doom eternal is
fantastic it's one of the best that I've
seen in quite some time and up there
with the likes of Gran Turismo sport and
Gears 5 but it requires a little
tweaking I made these adjustments on my
LG c8 OLED display and the result was
phenomenal with very bright highlights
but still plenty of contrast and smooth
shadow detail and every scene it has a
fundamentally transformative effect on
the colors - it's just so vibrant and
intense looking when displayed in HDR
it's not something I can display in this
video but if you have an HDR display
this is how you have to play it and of
course HDR is available in all versions
of the game so with all the work poured
into optimizing the engine then how does
this translate into real-world
performance across the current range of
consoles obviously some sacrifices are
necessary as not all platforms are
created equal but the results are
impressive nonetheless
firstly in terms of image quality it is
taking great care to ensure minimal
aliasing and pixel crawling across the
board the taa used here enables a clean
image across all machines even when the
base pixel count is rather low at the
top of the stack we have Xbox 1x which
tops out at 1800 P ps4 Pro comes in with
a maximum resolution of 1440 P bass ps4
is capped at 1080p and the original Xbox
one is 900 P in all cases however
dynamic resolution scaling is utilized
to ensure smoother performance and here
Xbox 1x still takes the pole position
with a resolution that seems to stay at
or above 1440p even in busy scenes ps4
pro can drop to roughly 1080p or
slightly below in comparison while both
base consoles can drop near 720p
resolutions though ps4 never quite goes
that low of the for the base Xbox one is
really the only version that regularly
appears blurry by eye during normal
gameplay but at least aliasing is kept
to a minimum across all platforms image
quality is generally fantastic all
things considered and I think their
solution for image treatment is one of
the best in the business
and really when you combine that with
the high-speed gameplay the excellent
motion blur and the like it's difficult
to notice a real drop in resolution
unless you're looking closely in
particular Xbox one X and ps4 pro both
look great all the time now beyond
resolution settings also differ per
platform the base systems offer a level
of detail more consistent with the PC
version set to medium settings while
Xbox 1x and ps4 Pro utilize a mix of
high in ultra settings instead one of
the primary optimizations relates to LOD
distance the point where the game swaps
between higher and lower detail models
based on distance from the camera I
already explained the way in which LEDs
are utilized in this game and as you'd
expect that means the base consoles
utilize lower detail LOD s closer to the
camera
however as resolution is taken into
account there is
in the way of noticeable object poppin
during gameplay
it feels genuinely stable across all
machines it's only when you compare with
say the ps4 pro and Xbox one X against
the base consoles what you notice that
there's a difference at all
but beyond the basic settings the visual
quality is comparable
overall most effects are consistent
across the board the full suite of
post-processing is utilized everywhere
and the game just looks great in all
cases
then there's performance doom eternal
has been sold in the promise of 60
frames per second across all consoles
but is that really the case well the
answer is mostly yes but there are some
slight caveats let's begin with the
enhanced consoles specifically
PlayStation 4 Pro this is perhaps the
most stable of the bunch turning in
effectively a locked 60 frames per
second now I say effectively because if
you watch the frame time graph over
there on the left you will spot moments
where one two or even three frames may
go over-budget but these are exceedingly
rare most of the time this area I
selected for the benchmark by the way I
feel is a good representation of the
performance you can expect since it's
one of the larger areas in the game
but I did test various other areas
including this and again minor blips
here and there but for the most part
it's rock-solid you may encounter an
occasional dip in certain cutscenes as
well but the actual gameplay is just
about perfect the optimization here is
excellent Xbox one X is much the same in
mostly on par with ps4 Pro the same
massive area manages to run just as well
however there are some minor caveats
even with rebooting the system I
encountered these occasional hitches
where the game would seize up for a
second like this now I don't think this
is entirely the fault of the game it
could either be a background OS process
or something else related to the hard
drive health on this system but there's
no doubt that it was a little
distracting and as a result I do feel
that it's a little bit smoother on my
ps4 Pro vs. my Xbox one X but your
experience may vary what's interesting
here is that both versions do run
noticeably faster on average than doom
2016 with the 4k patch installed neither
system could lock the framerate in the
previous game and they both ran into
issues a lot more often it was still
smooth overall mind you but doom eternal
is a significant improvement despite the
massive boost in fidelity and you know
what this is equally true if the base
consoles as well neither ps4 nor Xbox 1s
deliver the same level of stability as
the enhanced consoles but they're not
that far off on ps4 for instance these
minor dips are simply a little more
frequent but ultimately rather minor in
the grand scheme of things
it still feels remarkably smooth most of
the time and this smoother than many
other 60fps shooters available on
consoles plus there's no tearing Xbox 1s
is a similar story but with even more
noticeable dips that are sustained for a
longer period of time
given the relative lack of power
available to the system however the
results are really quite solid Xbox 1s
always comes and dead last in our tests
these days and while that's still
technically true here it does get a lot
closer to the ps4 version than usual and
is very smooth overall I'd say
it did a great job on this one
considering the limitations of the
hardware all of this is to say that I
feel the team met their 60fps goal it's
more stable than Wolfenstein 2 from
machine games and even smoother than
doom 2016 it just looks and plays like a
dream on all platforms of course if you
have the hardware the PC version might
be the way to go I'm running a rather
capable rig equipped with a 16 core i9
79 60 X and in RTX 20 80 Ti so you'd
expect great performance and it does
arrive without issue in this case as a
test I'm running with dynamic resolution
scaling enabled to reach higher frame
rates but I'm also able to lock it to
native 4k at max detail while still
hitting 60fps or even higher however
what really surprised me is just how
high you can get while using lower
resolutions and settings and disabling
vsync earlier I mentioned 500 frames per
second and technically you can get there
but in reality it's more closer to
something like 300 to 500 frames per
second as my CPU is a bottleneck this is
with a very low resolution as well the
point though is to demonstrate just how
fast it can go and with next-gen CPUs
and GPUs reaching a thousand frames per
second as was suggested pre-release
should actually be feasible
those with better CPUs may even get
closer right now but one thing that
applies to all versions are the loading
times and this is perhaps one of the
biggest improvements yet basically it
has managed to shave off much of the
time required to load each stage it
still requires some degree of waiting
mind you but it's a huge improvement
over the previous game more importantly
loading after death is also much faster
now so it's easier to get back into the
action so how was this achieved well
according to Billy it's a mix of
dramatically better compression a
greater reliance on data streaming which
includes geometry LEDs textures sound
and more and the elimination of mega
textures beyond this important elements
are always retained in memory so you
don't need to reset the entire state of
the game when you die just specific
elements required for that checkpoint
and with all the talk of SSDs and
next-generation consoles it should come
as no surprise that a PC equipped with
an SSD exhibits basically no loading
times at all it's very fast and that
applies to the game as a whole it's so
fast
optimized and beautiful one of the most
impressive looking games that I've ever
played the mix of performance and detail
is just perfect
but it's not just a pretty face there's
a lot more to do maternal which is why I
want to briefly discuss some of my
thoughts on the gameplay at its core
between the colorful visuals
anti-gravity antics and its fast-paced
doom eternal almost feels like some
unholy mix between doom and quake 3
arena as a pure single-player game like
doom levels are designed around light
exploration with secrets and key cards
to find in order to progress but there's
still plenty of battles that take place
in arenas along with lots of platforming
and boost pads and the like that
resembles something like quake 3 the
weapon improvements also add to
traversal the super shotgun has a
grappling hook which can be used to
fling yourself around the stage by
grabbing on to enemies and it works
great where it most differs from doom
2016 however is the way in which the
battles tend to unfold in the previous
game most major battles were triggered
by a Gore Nest you walk up plunger fist
into the nest and a battle begins this
typically locks down the arena and you
need to kill everything in order to
proceed now doom eternal does still
feature arena like battles and there are
some points where movement is restricted
by gates but in many more instances it's
possible to just push past foes and get
to your objectives leaving enemies
within the level and the process it's a
subtle difference I suppose and it
doesn't happen all the time but it is
something I noticed one of my favorite
maps in the game though is super gore
nest a map which I feel is this game's
foundry which was my favorite map in
doom 2016 it's a massive map centered
around a triple keycard set of podiums
that you'll need to unlock over the
course of the stage the sense of looping
back in and around the areas you've
already visited is extremely satisfying
and it helps you gain a better
understanding of
how complex the map actually is the game
does take a little time to get going
though as the very first level is almost
like a straightforward linear tutorial
of sorts with very little of what makes
up the later maps but it's not a bad way
to start the game either overall I feel
that with eternal it has made a clear
distinction between classic doom and new
doom and I think that's great
the original still holds up brilliantly
but I appreciate the way in which
eternal builds from some of those
concepts while forging new ground this
is very much its own game which is why I
feel it's absolutely one game shooter
fans should not miss it's a lengthy
single-player adventure packed with
interesting stage design fantastic
combat and a brilliant presentation on
higher difficulties it becomes extremely
addictive as well and you feel as if
your skills are growing over time
especially with a mouse and keyboard
which is the best way to play it if I'm
honest no matter where you play it
though I cannot recommend this enough
doom eternal is one of the best action
games of the year without question but
that's gonna do it for this video if you
enjoyed it as always be sure to let us
know by liking subscribing bringing that
notification bill for instant updates
and of course following us over on
Twitter and until next time
rip and tear